so in order to solve any graph problems
we have to know traversal techniques and
the first traversal technique that we
are going to learn is bfs travis
technique now what is bfs it is nothing
but the breadth
first
search technique
okay you must have heard about this if
you have read trees so this is the first
technique that we are going to learn and
in the next video we will be learning
something as dfs we'll talk about dfs in
the next video but as of now let's focus
on bfs in order to solve any problem you
have to know the traversal technique so
you cannot skip this video so what is
bfs as the name suggests
breadth
very important term
breadth first search now usually graphs
are of two kinds one can be the one
based indexing graph which is this one
if you carefully see n is eight over
here and the graph numbering starts like
the node numbering starts from one or it
can be zero based indexing where the
graph numbering starts from zero that is
okay you just need to make sure you
write the code according to that but the
logic remains same so let's come back to
uh bfs so what is breadth
breadth first search so this term is
very important breadth it kind of
signifies
level wise traversal as well
this is also called as level wise
traversal but yeah generally the generic
term is breadth first so let's
understand so usually they will be
telling you a starting note okay
so assume i see you over here the
starting note is
one so i'm saying that this is the
starting note okay now what we say is
okay this is at the level zero that is
what we generally say this is at level
zero and then you say
these guys
are at a distance of one so you'll call
them as level
one then you see these guys
are at
level two
and then you see this guy
is at level three so what you do is in
breadth first search traversal first you
visit the first guy that is the starting
note and you write that so that that is
something that you have written then you
go to all the guys that on the next
level so this
was at the zeroth level so the next
level will be nothing but first so i can
say this is at the first level and this
is at the first level and the breadth
first
breadth first search traversal you can
either traverse this and then this or
you can either traverse two and then six
that is completely your choice so i will
decide to travel to six you can travel
six to as well that is completely okay
so this is also done now the next level
is level two and you know these all guys
are level two correct so what you do is
you say okay again you can write three
four seven eight you can write something
like eight seven four three that is
completely your choice as long as you
are traversing
all the notes in the level wise fashion
we are completely okay with it so it is
like three
four seven eight so see this is level
zero this is level one and all of these
are level two so the level two can be
traversed in any of the ways but they
should be travel together okay
next will be level three and this is
level three so i can say this is level
three so this will be the
uh breadth first bfs traversal of this
particular
graph
but if the starting node is one very
very important if the starting node is
one what if i change the starting node
so let's quickly change the starting
node and understand bfs in depth
so assume i tell you that the starting
node as of now is
six okay so i've changed the starting
node remember this
this is the starting node and this is at
level zero if this is at level zero you
cannot say this to be at level zero no
this
only one node can be at level zero so
you write
six at level zero if i ask you which
which is at level one then what you do
is you say this is at a distance one
this is at a distance one this is at a
distance one so all of these guys are at
equivalent distance very very important
all of these guys are at equivalent
distance so thereby you call them as
level one
level one and level one again you can
travel one first then seven then eight
that is your choice so i'll decide to
travel
one seven eight so this is level zero
this is level one you need to understand
the distance distance breadth it goes
equality the breadth so it was here it
went equivalent in the breadth that is
very important to understand okay next
if i ask you the next level that's true
so
for this this is level two
this is level two
and are there anyone else who is level
two i don't see so i can say okay
this guy is level two and this
particular guy is level two so you can
again write something like two and five
so this is level two perfect and it's
time for level three so obviously
one two three so this will be three
three one two three this will be three
another any other no so this is three
this is three so there are two guys who
are three
that's very important you travel depth
twice breath twice and everything
depends on the starting node depending
on the starting node the traversal will
change and you will always travel in the
breadth-wise manner in the breathwise
manner i hope that is clear
in order to do a bfs travis there is an
initial configuration that you need to
start off with so whatever is the
starting node given to you what you do
is
you clearly take a queue data structure
now if you don't know q data structure
please read about that you take a q data
structure q is nothing but
first in first out the guy who goes in
first gets out first so the initial
configuration says i am going to define
a queue data structure and that will
always contain
this particular guy remember this that
will always contain this particular guy
starting node and there is another thing
that you need to do you need to create
something as a visited array okay and
this visited array is something which is
very common in all the graph questions
and over here if you see the
node is numbered till nine and since the
graph is one based what you'll do is
you'll create this visited
of a size 10 okay please make sure you
create of a size 10 so this is like 0 1
2 3 4 5 6 seven eight nine so this will
be the visited one and whatever is the
starting node you go over there and you
mark it as one and everyone else will be
marked as zero so over here
please understand this one means
this guy is already in the queue
whenever i say someone has been
traversed someone has been touched wait
mark that as visited this will be the
initial configuration initially a queue
which contains a starting node initially
a visited array which will be of size
depending on its one based or zero based
you can decide and
the starting node will be traversed so
thereby it will be marked as one this is
going to be the initial or the starting
configuration in a bfs traversal what is
the next step that you'll do
whatever is in the queue you will start
taking it out start taking it out start
taking it out till the queue is not
empty remember this keep taking out keep
taking out till the queue is not empty
okay so whatever is at the
queue data structure i take it out and
you'll print it so assume i print this
so this is printed right this is printed
as a bfs travis now
very important whatever you take out of
the queue one you took out of the queue
so if you remember this graph
you would have stored this in some data
structure and which data structure was
that that data structure was adjacency
list do you remember yes so what will be
the adjacency list for this particular
graph can i say for 0 it will be an
empty data structure for one it will be
storing
this two and six remember this
okay let's write for the next
for three it will just be storing two so
please write that
sorry for two you have to write in the
next step
for two it will be
storing one three and four
so let's write one three and four
next will be for three let's check out
for three
for three it's just storing two so let's
uh stored two in it
next will be four for four it is having
five and two so for four it will be two
and five
four five four
for 7 for 8 similarly create the entire
adjacency
list
that i have already taught you in the
second video so kindly create this and
after that we can start off with the bfs
traverses
okay
so
so this is how the entire adjacency list
will look like now whenever you take the
first element out and you print it what
you do is you go to one and you say who
are your neighbors i
i repeat you ask who are your
neighbors
okay
and how will you know who are its
neighbors if you remember well enough in
the graph you can see that 2 and 6 are
its neighbors 2 and 6 are its neighbors
who are at an equivalent distance so if
you remember
this guy stores all the neighbors
remember in the second lecture i told
you so who are the neighbors of one two
and six so what you do is you take two
you take six first take two
put that into the queue data structure
okay
and mark it as one
next week six put it into the queue data
structure and mark it as one perfect
done
so first iteration of one is done
so it is very simple let me repeat you
took out one
you
basically went to its neighbors and you
put that into the queue and marked it as
visited next time take out the next guy
so i'll take out the next guy too
do the same thing on this two as well go
to two's neighbors who are two's
neighbors how will you know again two's
neighbors are one three four
very obvious one three four are its
neighbors and that is stored in the
adjacency list so two neighbors wear one
but remember this one will not be put
into the queue why because you've
already traversed one because you've
already traversed one how will you know
that because because yes one is already
marked as visited so you already know
one has been touched or traversed so
you'll not take one instead of that what
you'll do is you will simply uh omit one
and you'll not put that into the queue
let's check out the next it is three and
four so you'll just take three and
you'll take four and put that into the
queue and mark three and four as visited
perfect this is done next you take the
next element out six so six is there
again do the same thing for six who are
six neighbor one already visited seven
not visited nine not visited so you take
seven and you take nine and you put that
into the queue data structure at the
same time mark seven is true nine is
true perfect
done six is done what's the next thing
three let's take out three four threes
neighbors just two already visited
nothing to do so three is also done
let's take the next one out four poor
force neighbor two already visited
five
take five
put that into the queue
mark five as true perfect
four is also done next take seven
who are sevens
neighbors six visited eight not visited
take eight and put that into the queue
and mark it as visited
perfect
next
so
nine
what what about nine
for nine there's one neighbor six but
that is already visited so
done next take five
for five
who's the neighbor
four and eight and if you carefully see
four and eight are already visited so no
need to do anything five is also done
next take eight
and for eight
if you see five and seven are already
visited no need to do anything so this
is also done
apparently if you see
this is
your bfs traversal yes
your bfs travis zeroth level
first level
second level and the third level if you
carefully see so we were successfully
able to print the bfs traversal of a
particular graph right now it's time
that we check out the code so i hope you
have understood the entire explanation
now it's time to check out the c plus
plus code and the java code so what i'll
do is i'll write the c plus plus code
and i'll explain every step and the java
code is on the left so that you can just
follow for every corresponding c plus
plus step what will be the java code and
we are going to follow the same
structure of code so you'll not face a
problem so generally uh what will happen
is you'll be given uh something like
vector int where you have to store the
bfs and return and always you'll be
given the number of notes and you
will be given the adjacency list you
don't need to create the adjacency list
they'll be giving you the adjacency list
in almost all the problems now this
problem states uh a directed graph but
we will be coding this for an undirected
graph and then i'll tell you why the
same code will work for directed graph
as well okay so what is the initial step
if you remember so first let's quickly
check if this is a zero based indexing
graph so if you see
it is a zero based indexing graph
because the graph is starting from zero
right so what you will do is
you will just create the ind visited
array of n size and probably mark
everything as this and you know the
initial configuration will be having
zero and we will have a queue
okay and in the queue you know it will
it will be having the starting node done
now what we did we always took out
everything from the queue till there was
something in the queue so can i say
always take out like till it is having
something
till it is having something till the
size is like still is not empty just
take it out and i can say the note that
is taken out like it will be q dot front
and we can just secure pop so this will
make sure you always get the note and
can i see if i have to store the
vfs i probably can just
do it over here and i can easily store
whichever node comes out that's that
that is what gets into the bfs done what
is the next thing that we did we always
took out the node if you remember and we
checked out its neighbor notes
right so who is storing the neighbor
notes yes the adjacency list so for this
node
can i say
if i do auto of i t of adjacency node
what does this mean whenever i write
adjacency node i'm saying
index node that adjacency element will
be a vector
if you remember the vector adjacency
list if you remove the list if you say
index that index is storing a vector and
that vector is storing all the new
elements so you have to just iterate on
them so these are the neighbor elements
i t you just need to check have they
been previously visited if not you see
okay let me visit them
very simple and let me put them into the
queue as well so that in the next step
they can be taken into the pfs once this
is done you can say this is my answer
once this is done you can always say
this is my answer okay now let's quickly
compile this and check so if you see uh
the compilation is successful and let's
quickly now submit the code and check if
it's working fine and so it's time to
understand the space complexity and the
time complexity space complexity is very
simple a queue
a visited node and a bfs
list so we go of 3n which is almost
equivalent to be go off n and the
adjacency list is given to you so you
can just omit this and what about the
time complexity time complexity is very
simple
now if i go and analyze the time
complexity
i know one thing for sure
if you look at the code in the code this
is running
and you know every time
a node will come and go into the bfs so
a node goes once into the bfs i know for
sure goes
once into the bfs
right so if a node goes once into the
bfs and it runs
on all its neighbors
can i say it runs on all its degrees
runs on
all
degrees
so can i say it's something like while
q naught empty
and then there's a for loop
and this for loop runs for all node and
it will run for the number of degrees of
that node because if this guy has three
neighbors it's going to run for three
neighbors all degrees so can i say this
for loop is what it is running so
thereby thereby i can say the time
complexity to be the queue itself will
run big o of n times because there are n
nodes
and this inside guy will run for total
degrees and if you remember the total
degrees we have already concluded as
twice of edges this was done in the
first lecture the total degrees because
for every node we traverse all the
neighboring nodes so this will be the
time complexity for this particular guy
so guys i hope you have understood the
entire bfs algorithm just in case you
did please please please make sure you
like this video and if you're new to our
channel what are you waiting for man
just hit that subscribe button right
away and with this i will be wrapping up
this video if you haven't checked out
our dpc's and the sd sheet the links are
in the description make sure you check
it out but this let's wrap up this video
let's speed in some other video till
then bye bye take care
whenever your heart is
[Music]
will find a broken in